---
title: Streams
author: Sillycheese
date: 2024-02-15 12:00:00 +0800
categories:
  - 语言相关
  - 关于真正的C++
tags:
  - cpp
---
## Streams

stream: an abstraction for input/output. Streams convert between data and the string representation of data.

`std::cout`is an output stream .It has type `std::ostream`

### Two ways to classify streams

#### By Direction:
- **Input streams**
- **Output streams**
- **Input/Output streams**
#### By Source or Destination:
- **Console streams**
- **File streams**
- **String streams**

## Output Streams

console 
```
std::cout << 5 << std::endl;
```
file streams
```
std::ofstream out(“out.txt”)
```
## Input Streams
- Each >> ONLY reads until the next Whitespace  
	- Whitespace = tab, space, newline  
- Everything after the first whitespace gets saved and used the next time std::cin >> is called  
	- The place its saved is called a **buffer**!  
### When things go wrong
两个例子
```
string str;  
int x;  
string otherStr;
std::cin >> str >> x >> otherStr;  
//what happens if input is blah blah blah?  
std::cout << str << x << otherStr;
//once an error is detected, the input stream’s  
//fail bit is set, and it will no longer accept  
//input
```

```
int age; double hourlyWage;  
cout << "Please enter your age: ";  
cin >> age;  
cout << "Please enter your hourly wage: ";  
cin >> hourlyWage;  
//what happens if first input is 2.17?
```

### std::getline()
```
// Used to read a line from an input stream  
// Function Signature  
istream& getline(istream& is, string& str, char delim);
```
In contrast:  
- “>>” only reads until it hits  
whitespace (so can’t read a  
sentence in one go)  
- BUT “>>” can convert data to  
built-in types (like ints) while  
getline can only produce strings.
- AND “>>” only stops reading at predefined whitespace while getline can stop reading at any delimiter you define
==IMPORTANT==: Don’t mix >> with getline!
- >> reads up to the next whitespace character  
and does not go past that whitespace  
character.  
- getline reads up to the next delimiter (by  
default, ‘\n’), and does go past that delimiter.  
- TL;DR they don’t play nicely
## String streams
### If you only want to read OR write data:
- Read only: std::istringstream  
- Give any data type to the istringstream, it’ll store it as  
a string!  
- Write only: std::ostringstream  
- Make an ostringstream out of a string, read from it  
word/type by word/type!  
- Follows same patterns as the other i/ostreams!